OBSDOCS-190: user-defined-projects-first-steps-config (#78965)
openshift/openshift-docs: observability/monitoring/common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios"]
= Common monitoring configuration scenarios
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios

toc::[]

The default platform monitoring stack is available for use after installing {product-title}.
The in-cluster stack includes the core platform Prometheus instance that collects metrics from your cluster and the core Alertmanager instance that  routes alerts.

In addition to core platform monitoring, you can also optionally xref:../monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[enable monitoring for user-defined projects] for user workload monitoring.
After doing so, users can then monitor their own services and workloads without the need for an additional monitoring solution.

> Depending on which users will use the monitoring stack and for what purposes, as a cluster administrator, you can configure monitoring components to suit the needs of different users in various scenarios.

Reviewer: I added some coments to this introduction as part of this PR: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60288 as I reviewed that one first :smiley:

Author: Change in the original PR. You might have notice that the first part of both PRs was identical. Depending on which on merges first, I will delete the intro from the other PR.

[id="monitoring-for-user-defined-projects-first-steps_{context}"]
== Monitoring for user-defined projects: First steps

As a cluster administrator, you can enable monitoring for user-defined projects in addition to core platform monitoring.
Doing so enables non-administrator users such as developers to monitor their own projects outside of core platform monitoring.

After you complete the following configuration activities, users can view collected metrics, query these metrics, and receive alerts for their own projects:

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[Enable user-defined projects.]
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#granting-users-permission-to-monitor-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[Assign the `monitoring-rules-view`, `monitoring-rules-edit`, or `monitoring-edit` cluster roles] to grant non-administrator users permissions to monitor user-defined projects.

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#granting-users-permission-to-configure-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[assign the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` cluster role] to grant non-administrator users permission to configure user-defined projects.

Reviewer 2: ```
$ oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring get role user-workload-monitoring-config-edit
NAME                                   CREATED AT
user-workload-monitoring-config-edit   2024-07-17T00:12:25Z
```
user-workload-monitoring-config-edit is role, not cluster role

Author: fixed

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#granting-users-permission-to-configure-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[assign the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` cluster role] to grant non-administrator users permission to configure user-defined projects.

Author: agree. removed.

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[Enable alert routing for user-defined projects] so that developers and other users can configure custom alerts and alert routing for their projects.

> * If needed, configure alert routing for user-defined projects either to xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-the-platform-alertmanager-instance-for-user-defined-alert-routing_enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[use the Alertmanager instance deployed for core platform monitoring] or to xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-a-separate-alertmanager-instance-for-user-defined-alert-routing_enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[use an optional Alertmanager instance dedicated for use by user-defined projects].

Reviewer 2: it the link for `use the Alertmanager instance deployed for core platform monitoring` needed?

Author: Good point. Deleted.

> * If needed, configure alert routing for user-defined projects either to xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-the-platform-alertmanager-instance-for-user-defined-alert-routing_enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[use the Alertmanager instance deployed for core platform monitoring] or to xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-a-separate-alertmanager-instance-for-user-defined-alert-routing_enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[use an optional Alertmanager instance dedicated for use by user-defined projects].

Author: changed

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#configuring-different-alert-receivers-for-default-platform-alerts-and-user-defined-alerts_managing-alerts[configure different alert receivers for core platform alerts and alerts for user-defined projects.]

Author: Agree. changed.

> * If needed, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#applying-a-custom-configuration-to-alertmanager-for-user-defined-alert-routing_managing-alerts[apply a custom configuration to Alertmanager for user-defined alert routing.]

Author: removed

After you enable and configure monitoring for user-defined projects, developers and other users can then perform the following activities to set up and use monitoring for their own projects:

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#setting-up-metrics-collection-for-user-defined-projects_managing-metrics[Deploy and monitor services] in their project.

Reviewer 3: Here we use `Project` whereas the following points use `Projects`.

Author: fixed

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#setting-up-metrics-collection-for-user-defined-projects_managing-metrics[Deploy and monitor services] in their project.

Author: yes. good point. deleted

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alerting-rules-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[Create and manage alerting rules] for their projects.
> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-alerts[Receive and manage alerts] for their projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alerting-rules-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[Create and manage alerting rules.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-alerts[Receive and manage alerts].
```

Author: removed

> * If granted the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` cluster role by an administrator, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[configure alert routing].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If granted the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` role by an administrator, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[configure alert routing].
```

Author: fixed

> * If granted the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` cluster role by an administrator, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[configure alert routing].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If granted the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` role by an administrator, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[configure alert routing].
```
`user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` is role, not cluster role

Author: fixed

* Use the {product-title} web console to xref:../../observability/monitoring/reviewing-monitoring-dashboards.adoc#reviewing-monitoring-dashboards-developer_reviewing-monitoring-dashboards[view dashboards].

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#querying-metrics-for-user-defined-projects-as-a-developer_managing-metrics[Query the metrics collected in their projects] in the {product-title} web console either by using predefined queries or by creating their own PromQL queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#querying-metrics-for-user-defined-projects-as-a-developer_managing-metrics[Query the collected metrics] by creating PromQL queries or using predefined queries.
```

Author: Perfect. Changed!

:_mod-docs-content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios"]
= Common monitoring configuration scenarios
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: common-monitoring-configuration-scenarios

toc::[]

> After {product-title} is installed, core platform monitoring components immediately begins collecting metrics, which you can query and view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After {product-title} is installed, core platform monitoring components immediately begin collecting metrics, which you can query and view.
```

Author: fixed

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#granting-users-permission-to-configure-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects_enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects[Assign the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` role] to grant non-administrator users permission to configure user-defined projects.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[Enable alert routing for user-defined projects] so that developers and other users can configure custom alerts and alert routing for their projects.
* If needed, configure alert routing for user-defined projects to xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-a-separate-alertmanager-instance-for-user-defined-alert-routing_enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[use an optional Alertmanager instance dedicated for use only by user-defined projects].

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#configuring-different-alert-receivers-for-default-platform-alerts-and-user-defined-alerts_managing-alerts[Configure receivers] for alerts for user-defined projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#configuring-different-alert-receivers-for-default-platform-alerts-and-user-defined-alerts_managing-alerts[Configure alert receivers] for user-defined projects.
```
WDYT?

Author: Good suggestion. Changed

> * xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#configuring-different-alert-receivers-for-default-platform-alerts-and-user-defined-alerts_managing-alerts[Configure different alert receivers] for core platform alerts and alerts for user-defined projects.

Author: removed

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/reviewing-monitoring-dashboards.adoc#reviewing-monitoring-dashboards[View dashboards] to visualize collected metrics, troubleshoot alerts, and monitor other information about your cluster.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#about-querying-metrics_managing-metrics[Query collected metrics] by creating PromQL queries or using predefined queries.

[id="configuring-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects-getting-started_{context}"]

> == Configuring monitoring for user-defined projects: Getting started

Author: This is not a procedure but an overview with xrefs to procedures and so not something for a separate module. Leaving as-is

As a cluster administrator, you can optionally enable monitoring for user-defined projects in addition to core platform monitoring.

> Non-administrator users such as developers can then monitor their own projects outside of core platform monitoring.

Author: It is describing two different activities by two different user types (admin vs non-admin. So in my view, it's not redundant. Leaving as-is.

> Cluster administrators typically complete the following activities to configure user-defined projects so that users can view collected metrics, query these metrics, and receive alerts for their own projects:

Author: Good suggestion, but I want to keep as-is to show that the items in the list are optional and that the admin doesn't need to do them all.

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[Enable alert routing for user-defined projects] so that developers and other users can configure custom alerts and alert routing for their projects.
* If needed, configure alert routing for user-defined projects to xref:../../observability/monitoring/enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects.adoc#enabling-a-separate-alertmanager-instance-for-user-defined-alert-routing_enabling-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects[use an optional Alertmanager instance dedicated for use only by user-defined projects].
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#configuring-different-alert-receivers-for-default-platform-alerts-and-user-defined-alerts_managing-alerts[Configure alert receivers] for user-defined projects.
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#applying-a-custom-configuration-to-alertmanager-for-user-defined-alert-routing_managing-alerts[Apply a custom configuration to Alertmanager for user-defined alert routing].

> After you enable and configure monitoring for user-defined projects, developers and other users can then perform the following activities to set up and use monitoring for their own projects:

Reviewer 4: This piece would be tricky consider we are trying to address different types of users. But to ensure that the conversation style is same, how about something similar to below?
```suggestion
After the monitoring is enabled and configured for user-defined projects, as non-administrator user, you can then perform the following activities to set up and use monitoring for their own projects:
```

Author: Good suggestion! Updated to

`After monitoring for user-defined projects is enabled and configured, developers and other non-administrator users can then perform the following activities to set up and use monitoring for their own projects:`

* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-metrics.adoc#setting-up-metrics-collection-for-user-defined-projects_managing-metrics[Deploy and monitor services].
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alerting-rules-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[Create and manage alerting rules].
* xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-alerts[Receive and manage alerts] for their projects.

> * If granted the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` role by an administrator, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[configure alert routing].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If granted the `user-workload-monitoring-config-edit` role, xref:../../observability/monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#creating-alert-routing-for-user-defined-projects_managing-alerts[configure alert routing].
```
